of your life are set, and, basically, you can't do much about it.
Frankl was also a psychiatrist and a Jew. He was imprisoned in the death camps
of Nazi Germany, where he experienced things that were so repugnant to our
sense of decency that we shudder to even repeat them.
His parents, his brother, and his wife died in the camps or were sent to the gas
ovens. Except for his sister, his entire family perished. Frankl himself suffered
torture and innumerable indignities, never knowing from one moment to the
next if his path would lead to the ovens or if he would be among the "saved"
who would remove the bodies or shovel out the ashes of those so fated.
One day, naked and alone in a small room, he began to become aware of what
he later called "the last of the human freedoms"- the freedom his Nazi captors
could not take away. They could control his entire environment, they could do
what they wanted to his body, but Viktor Frankl himself was a self-aware being
who could look as an observer at his very involvement. His basic identity was
intact. He could decide within himself how all of this was going to affect him.
Between what happened to him, or the stimulus, and his response to it, was his
freedom or power to choose that response.
In the midst of his experiences, Frankl would project himself into different
circumstances, such as lecturing to his students after his release from the death
camps. He would describe himself in the classroom, in his mind's eye, and give
his students the lessons he was learning during his very torture.
Through a series of such disciplines---mental, emotional, and moral,
principally using memory and imagination-he exercised his small, embryonic
freedom until it grew larger and larger, until he had more freedom than his
Nazi captors. They had more liberty, more options to choose from in their
environment; but he had more freedom, more internal power to exercise his
options. He became an inspiration to those around him, even to some of the
guards. He helped others find meaning in their suffering and dignity in their
prison existence.
In the midst of the most degrading circumstances imaginable, Frankl used the
human endowment of self-awareness to discover a fundamental principle about
the nature of man: Between stimulus and response, man has the freedom to
